# Software Reliability and Testing

**IMPORTANT: THIS IS A WORK IN PROGRESS**

A [University of Montana](https://www.umt.edu) course covering tools,
techniques, and practices commonly used to produce more reliable software.

## Shortcuts

  * [Assignments](assignments/)
  * [Topics](topics/)

## Schedule

The [topics/](topics/) directory contains the materials we will cover. Keep in
mind that many topics will build on one another. This means that you really
don't want to fall behind. If you miss a week, be sure to catch up.

There are no dates assigned to topics because I'm not sure how quickly we will
move through the material.

## Instruction

Lectures will be delivered in-person. If you need accomodation due to the
Covid-19 pandemic, please reach out as soon as possible.

## Office Hours

Office hours will be held in an on-demand fashion, either in-person or
virtually. Please use [Calendly](https://calendly.com/glesica) to schedule an
office hours appointment.

If you need help with an assignment, it is generally a good idea to include
whatever code or data you are working with when you email me. You can do this
using the `tar` command.

To create a compressed file that includes all the files in a particular
directory, use the following (in this case, the directory you want to zip is
called `the_dir`):

```
tar czf the_dir.tgz the_dir
```

After you've done this, you can attach `the_dir.tgz` to an email.

## Assignments

Due dates are going to be a pretty relaxed affair. You'll lose a point for every
day something is late. The idea here is just to keep the whole class from
turning in every assignment on the last day of the semester.

Assignments can be found in the [assignments/](assignments/) directory.

## Reading

There isn't a textbook, but there are a couple books that students might find
informative. These are listed below. This list will likely be updated as the
semester progresses.

  * [A Friendly Introduction to Software
    Testing](https://github.com/laboon/ebook)
  * [A Philosophy of Software Design](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/39996759-a-philosophy-of-software-design)

## Guest Speakers

We will have a number of [guest speakers](guests.html) throughout the semester.
Each will discuss a topic related to the course on which they have significant
personal experience.

## Grading

Assignments will be evaluated automatically or by the instructor and grades will
be posted on the course's Moodle page for confidentiality.

## Disabilities

If you have a documented disability and would like to discuss an affordance,
please let me know as soon as possible.

## Instructor

[George Lesica](https://lesica.com) is a Senior Software Scientist in the
[Wheeler Lab](https://wheelerlab.org) at the University of Montana and a
freelance software development and technology consultant.

  - Email: <george.lesica@umontana.edu>
  - Microsoft Teams: George Lesica

