# Languages and Tools

Students will need a basic understanding of the languages and tools described
below. The course will assume that you can use them and, as such, I will not
spend very much time on them in class.

I realize that some of these are not part of the normal CS curriculum. That
being said, you won't need expertise in most of them, just a basic
understanding. It should be possible to gain this level of understanding quite
easily.

## Languages

We will use a variety of programming languages in this course. For the most part
we're going to keep it simple and stick to Python wherever possible. However,
there are a number of topics that lend themselves to other languages, so we'll
use whatever makes sense in those cases.

### C

  * [Tutorial](https://www.programiz.com/c-programming)

A semi-statically typed, procedural programming language upon which most modern
computing infrastructure is built, including most operating systems.

### Haskell

  * [Website](https://www.haskell.org)
  * [Tutorial](http://learnyouahaskell.com/chapters)
  * [UPenn Course](https://www.seas.upenn.edu/~cis194/fall16/)

A purely functional, statically typed language often associated with academic
work on programming language theory, but found in industry as well.

### JavaScript

  * [Reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/javascript)
  * [Tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLWrQZnG8l0E5hMTpzCK8WjP3nJ93jUEyk)
    (videos)

JavaScript is a popular among web application developers for its ability to run
on both the server and client (browser). It is weakly typed and was originally
based around prototypal inheritance, a relatively uncommon but powerful dynamic
paradigm.

### Kotlin

  * [Website](http://kotlinlang.org)
  * [Tutorial](https://play.kotlinlang.org/byExample/overview)

A statically typed, object-oriented language with many modern features that
compiles to JVM bytecode and can easily interoperate with code written in Java.

### Python

  * [Website](https://www.python.org)
  * [Tutorial](https://www.programiz.com/python-programming)

Python is one of the most popular programming languages in the world and is
commonly taught in schools. It has gained particular traction in machine
learning, data science, web application development, and scientific computation.

### Racket

  * [Website](http://racket-lang.org)
  * [Tutorial](https://docs.racket-lang.org/quick/index.html)

A variant of the Scheme programming language (itself a member of the Lisp
family) commonly used to produce domain specific languages (DSLs).

## Tools

Software developers use tools to help them build things more effectively, just
as a carpenter uses tools like a hammer or saw. We will explore a number of
different tools as part of this course, but there are a few listed below that
students ought to be at least somewhat familiar with in order to complete
assignments.

### Docker

  * [Website](http://docker.com)

Docker is a container runtime for Linux. A container is an isolated filesystem
that acts similarly to a virtual machine in that it can run a different
operating system and contain different software than the "host" system. We will
use Docker as a way to provide various tools in a consistent environment so that
we are all running the exact same version of a given tool.

We will go over how to use Docker in class before it becomes necessary.

### Git

  * [Website](https://git-scm.com)
  * [Tutorial](https://git-scm.com/doc) (videos)
  * [Book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2)

Git is a distributed version control system originally developed for use by the
Linux kernel team. It has gained widespread adoption in both commercial and open
source software development.

### GitHub

  * [Website](https://github.com)

GitHub is a service used to host and interact with Git repositories. It includes
many features that aren't built into Git itself, such as issue tracking and a
system for conducting code reviews.

Students will need a GitHub account and we will go over certain GitHub features
in class.

